welcome to topcast and to the third and
second to last installment of my
breakdown and discussion of chapter nine
from the fabric of reality quantum
computers
last episode on this particular chapter
I finished in a place where David wrote
about his own contribution to the field
starting the field many of us would say
by proving in other words mathematically
demonstrating how a new mode of
computation could be harnessed today
we're going further today in terms of
what I would say is some of the more
philosophical scientific underpinnings
of how it is that Quantum and classical
are different to one another and next
episode I will devote more to a specific
practical application of quantum
Computing Shaw's algorithm in that
section I'll go further into the
mathematics than what the fabric of
reality itself does in order to provide
uh an overview of the algorithm so we'll
be doing a little bit of mathematics
don't worry nothing graduate level or
anything like that just enough to gain a
little bit of deeper insight into what's
going on and why why so this is why as I
constructed this series over time it
ended up being produced into discrete
chunks itself I realized that the
section about Shaw's algorithm really
did require its own episode entirely so
that's why things are being broken up in
this way what I'm about to read today
includes something I've read before in
various other episodes but not to do
with this chapter 9 episode The it from
Cubit stuff and in some other episodes
I've concentrated on a passage that
comes up here because I just think it's
so enlightening to tease out the
differences between the classical and
the quantum as with much of David's
content it Bears repeating and anyway
not everyone listens to all of my
episodes so you may not have heard this
before yourself in this section not only
do we get a distinction between the
classical and the quantum but again the
discrete versus The Continuous comes up
and how there has always been something
Quantum about the classical when it when
it comes the Computing anyway well let's
just read this section and David writes
quote the classical theory of
computation which was the unchallenged
foundation of computing for half a
century is now obsolete except like the
rest of classical physics as an
approximation scheme
the theory of computation is now the
quantum theory of computation
I said that Turing implicitly used
classical mechanics in his construction
but with the benefit of hindsight we can
now see that even the classical theory
of computation did not fully conform to
classical physics and contained strong
adjubrations of quantum theory it is no
coincidence that the word bit meaning
the smallest possible amount of
information that a computer can
manipulate means essentially the same as
Quantum a discrete chunk end quote so
there we have it the bit
the object from classical computation is
a discrete chunk a discrete bit of
information literally while the quanta
is a discrete chunk as well thought in
some ways to actually be the defining
feature of quantum theory it shouldn't
be but in some ways well that's where
the name quantum theory came from but we
do have a problem before us in quantum
theory we've got this situation where
many systems all systems really can only
take on discrete values our go-to
example here is something where like an
electron orbiting a nucleus orbiting in
scare quotes corresponds to its energy
these energy levels are sometimes called
orbitals again while that term orbital
might be misleading the fact is that an
electron can be in this or that orbital
this or that state and not in between
apparently the electron is stable in a
particular orbital perhaps located as
close as it possibly can be to the
nucleus by as close as possible I mean
close as physically permitted as close
as the laws allow it to be but it cannot
be even if it we call that orbital the N
equals one energy level and we've got an
N equals two energy level it can be in
either of those States n equals one
being the so-called ground state where
it has the least amount of energy the
closest it can possibly be to the
nucleus and n equals to the next energy
level up where it's a little further
away and then you have n equals three
four five and so on it goes on to
Infinity it can be in any of these
discrete energy levels but it can't be
in between so we're told there's no such
thing as an N equals 1.5 energy level
even though there is physical space
there that it could occupy we never find
it there and we know all this because
experiments can be done one that I've
talked about is the photoelectric effect
that's a subtly different kind of effect
but more commonly if we are to
understand things like spectroscopy how
when you put electricity let's say
through a neon glass tube you end up
getting a particular characteristic
color and that characteristic color is
made up of wavelengths of light
wavelengths of light photons of light
that correspond to the difference
between the energy levels of electrons
orbiting the for example neon atom neon
nucleus I should say and calculations
can be done and those photons when you
do the results of the when you when you
measure in other words when you find the
results of your experiment by doing such
uh emission experiments the emission of
light from particular gases those
photons always have precisely the energy
that you would calculate as the
difference between the energy levels
from where the photons are coming in
other words the difference in potential
energy between n equals 2 and n equals
one say you can calculate that energy
and then you do an experiment to test
whether or not the photon that you're
getting has exactly the same energy as
what you would expect coming from that
transition of the electron from the
higher energy level to the lower energy
level and voila it does you have an
explanation it's all very neat so that's
physics isn't it how wonderful
okay so that's one thing to keep in mind
what is sometimes said at this
particular point when you're talking
about these kind of experiments where
electrons are moving from n equals to
the high energy level to n equals one
the lower energy level is that the
electron cannot possibly ever be halfway
between n equals one and n equals two it
is said it cannot occupy that space and
this is where the term quantum jump
comes from it used to mean this term
quantum jump it used to mean tiny
discrete jump and was a great mystery
because how can you get from here at the
N equals two position to there at the N
equals one position without passing
through the space in between
nowadays in business and other areas
Quantum jump has come to mean a huge
change but that aside do Quantum jumps
actually ever happen well no they don't
Erwin Schrodinger said as much and David
Deutsch also wrote about this in fact
it's worth reading what he wrote about
this in the edge magazine in answer to a
particular question so let's go there
here's the article I won't read the
entire thing just the first few
paragraphs and you get the flavor of
what's going on
The Edge Magazine asked the question
what scientific idea is ready for
retirement and David Deutsch answered
Quantum jumps Quantum jumps are ready
for retirement okay so let's read it in
fact he begins this is obviously where I
got it from the term quantum jump
entered everyday language as a metaphor
for a large discontinuous change it has
also become widespread in the vast but
sadly repetitive landscape of
pseudoscience and mysticism and he goes
on to say a quote
the term comes from physics and is
indeed used by physicists though rarely
published in papers it evokes the fact
that mutually distinguishable States in
Quantum physical systems are always
discrete yet there is no such phenomenon
in quantum physics as a Quantum jump
under the laws of quantum theory change
is always continuous in both space and
time okay maybe some physicists still
subscribe to an exception that namely
the so-called collapse of the wave
function when an object is observed by a
conscious Observer but that nonsense is
not the nonsense I'm referring to here
I'm referring to misconceptions even
about the sub-microscopic world like
when an electron in a higher energy
State undergoes a transition to a lower
energy level emitting a photon it
quantum jumps from one discrete orbit to
another without passing through
intermediate States
even worse
when an electron in a tunnel diode
approaches the barrier that does not
have enough energy to penetrate so that
under classical physics it would bounce
off the quantum phenomenon of tunneling
allows it to appear mysteriously on the
other side without ever having been in
the region where it would have negative
kinetic energy
the truth is that the electron in such
situations does not have a single energy
or position but a range of energies and
positions and the allowed range itself
can change with time if the whole range
of energies of a tunneling particle were
below that required to surmount the
barrier it would indeed bounce off and
if an electron in an atom really were at
a discrete energy level and nothing
intervened to change that then it would
never make a transition to any other
energy end quote I'll end the reading
there it's enough to say that the
electron has this range of energies and
range of positions and that solves this
issue it's not that if you're in the N
equals 2 orbital you have a single
energy and if your n the N equals one
orbital you have a single energy you
have a range of energies by virtue of
the fact you are a Quantum object a
multiversal object with this range of
physical properties across the
Multiverse even if you're only ever
observed to have one in a given Universe
when a measurement is taken that has to
be the case and that's what the notion
of discrete is you will only ever
measure one of them but across the
Multiverse all of the possible energies
are represented somehow my own modest
contribution to this is an article I
wrote well there we go 10 years ago 2014
I wrote this and I titled it perhaps
I've over overstated things here but the
title is an explanation of how most
physics texts get the explanation of
photon emission deliberately wrong
okay I say deliberately there maybe
that's a bit harsh but they do get it
wrong
we might say deliberately because
they're deliberately avoiding the facts
of reality and good epistemology I'm not
going to bore you by reading my own
article if you'd like to you can look
this up it's um called
you go to
www.breathhall.org forward slash light
and you'll find it but I'm just skipping
to towards the end where I quote
Schrodinger
among other people as well as I provide
links there to a number of YouTube
videos bits of text on the internet
where physicists are actually using this
notion of quantum jumps and getting
things wrong uh look chemists don't
quite make the same kind of Errors it
seems to me but
that aside what I write towards the end
here quoting myself is quote but it's
not only David Deutsch because
Schrodinger himself weighed in on this
writing quote I believe one is allowed
to regard microscopic interaction as a
continuous phenomenon without losing
either the precious results of Planck
and Einstein on the equilibrium of
macroscopic energy between radiation and
matter or any other understanding of
phenomena but the parcel Theory affords
end quote
and I go on to say in other words the
results of Plank and Einstein that that
electrons really are particles Parcels
is not affected At All by taking on the
idea that transitions between energy
levels happen continuously just like a
skydiver Who falls continuously from the
plane to the ground end quote and that
harks back to something I say earlier
comparing this to the classical notion
of gravity anyway the the Central Point
here is that the electron has a range of
energies and positions and they can
change over time I'd further say that
just because
one never observes an electron at the
intermediate position doesn't mean it
can never possibly be there after all
that's the empiricist mistake you can't
see it therefore it can't possibly
happen that's not true
at least modern day attempts to picture
the electron around a nucleus get thing
have improved someone
you you look up modern you know
cartoonish representations of what's
going on with electrons around nuclei
and they represent it as this cloudy
wavy probability distribution type thing
that gets closer to the truth than other
representations that you can quite
easily readily find in any book or on
the internet anywhere when you look at
how electrons are positioned around
nuclei okay some pictures are closer to
the truth than others the transition
between n equals two and n equals one
for example can be continuous
even if those States themselves are
discrete and the photon so detected when
you have photo emission from n equals
two to an N equals one transition is
always exactly the same energy or
wavelength frequency color whatever we
want to say about that okay David has
more to say about this in the fabric of
reality so let's go back there and David
Wrights in the fabric of reality quote
discrete variables variables that cannot
take a continuous range of values are
alien to classical physics for example
if a variable has only two possible
values say zero and one how does it ever
get from zero to one I asked this
question in chapter two
In classical physics it would have to
jump discontinuously which is
incompatible with how forces and motions
work in classical mechanics in quantum
physics no discontinuous change is
necessary even though all measurable
quantities are discrete it works as
follows let us start by imagining some
parallel universes stacked like a pack
of cards with the pack as a whole
representing the Multiverse such a model
in which the universes are arranged in a
sequence greatly understates the
complexity of the Multiverse but it
suffices to illustrate my point here now
let us alter the model to take account
of the fact that the Multiverse is not a
discrete set of universes but a
continuum
and that not all the universes are
different
and that bears repeating
let us alter the model to take account
of the fact that Multiverse is not a
discrete set of universes it's not
parallel universes like cards in a deck
but it's a continuum
where also
some of the universes are identical to
one another he goes on to say in fact
for each universe that is present there
is also a Continuum of identical
universes present comprising a certain
Tiny But non-zero proportion of the
Multiverse in our model this proportion
may be represented by the thickness of a
card where each card now represents all
the universes of a given type however
unlike the thickness of a card the
proportion of each type of universe
changes with time under quantum
mechanical laws of motion consequently
the proportion of universes having a
given property also changes and it
changes continuously in the case of a
discrete variable changing from zero to
one suppose that the variable has the
value 0 in all universes before the
change begins and that after the change
it has the value 1 in all universes
during the change the proportion of
universes in which the value is zero
Falls smoothly from one hundred percent
to zero and the proportion in which the
value is 1 rises correspondingly from
zero to a hundred percent
figure 9.4 shows a Multiverse view of
such a change and there we have a
picture a diagram of this continuous
change between two discrete States the
zero and the one the proportion of the
universe's change over time
that's the continuous aspect of this
David goes on to say quote it might seem
from that figure there that although the
transition from zero to one is
objectively continuous from the
Multiverse perspective it remains
subjectively discontinuous from the
point of view of any individual universe
as represented Say by a horizontal line
halfway up figure 9.4 however that is
merely a limitation of the diagram and
not a real feature of what is happening
although the diagram makes it seem that
there is at each instant a particular
universe that has just changed from zero
to one because it has just crossed the
boundary that's not really so it cannot
be because such a universe is strictly
identical with every other Universe in
which the bit has value one at that time
so if the inhabitants of one of them
were experiencing a discontinuous change
then so would the inhabitants of all the
others therefore none of them can have
such an experience note also as I
explained in Chapter 11 that the idea of
anything moving across a diagram such as
such as figure 9.4 in which time is
already represented is simply a mistake
at each instant the bit has a value one
in a certain proportional universe is in
zero in another all those universes at
all those times are already shown in
figure 9.4 they're not moving anywhere
end quote
and this leads to this idea of time
being in the instant that I've said
before this comes from Julian Barber
time is in the instant and so here's a
particular case where we notice that you
can only possibly observe zero and one
these are the only states that that
exists and this is how and this explains
how you get from the zero to one in a
continuous way because the proportion of
universes are changing over time
continuously and again I say over time
but even that that is sort of uh that
takes time out of the Multiverse in a
sense which isn't true and it says there
that no one has no one experiences a
discontinuous change you don't have that
experience
what you experience is measuring
something you measure a zero or a one
the two states that exist you'll never
catch it halfway in between it's in one
place or the other
even though it moves from one place to
the other continuously but the laws only
allow you to measure them measure these
whatever the object is in the state zero
or one in either zero or one one of
those States you don't measure electrons
at the intermediate point you experience
zero one or n equals two and n equals
one orbitals okay energy levels there or
any of the other discrete values that
are permitted but to get from n equals 2
to n equals one or whatever Quantum
states to whatever other Quantum State
the transition that happens is
continuous across the Multiverse as I've
emphasized and David said but you don't
see that there is movement through space
even if you do not experience it again
the demand that you should
or that somehow that would be a
refutation of all of these facts is just
an appeal to empiricism but as we always
say here there is just so much in
science perhaps most of the interesting
stuff we just never do see and cannot
see even in principle
David goes on to say quote
another way in which quantum physics is
implicit In classical computation is
that all practical implementations of
Turing type computers rely on such
things as solid matter or magnetized
materials which could not exist in the
absence of quantum mechanical effects
for example any solid body consists of
an array of atoms which are themselves
composed of electrically charged
particles electrons and protons in the
nuclei but because of classical chaos no
array of charged particles could be
stable under classical Laws of Motion
the positively and negatively charged
particles would simply move out of
position and crash into each other and
the structure would disintegrate it is
only the strong Quantum interference
between the various paths taken by
charged particles in parallel universes
that prevents such catastrophes and
makes solid matter possible
end quote so just remember this harks
back to something that was said earlier
in the fabric of reality about this
distinction between classical chaos type
theories and the quantum in the quantum
you occupy a particular space
you occupy a particular place
you can't have infinitely small changes
which you can have in classical physics
and these infinitely small changes that
you could have if the world the universe
physical reality was governed by true
classical laws of physics would mean
that you have these amplification
effects that lead to chaos the
disintegration of atoms in other words
it's only the quantum the interference
that allows these things to be stable
David goes on to say quote building a
universal quantum computer is well
beyond present technology as I have said
detecting an interference phenomenon
always involves setting up an
appropriate interaction between all the
variables that have been different in
the universes that contribute to the
interference the more interacting
particles are involved therefore the
harder it tends to be to engineer the
interaction that would display the
interference that is the result of the
computation
among the many technical difficulties of
working at the level of a single atom or
single electron one of the most
important is that of preventing the
environment from being affected by the
different interfering subcomputations
for if a group of atoms is undergoing an
interference phenomenon and they
differentially affect other atoms in the
environment then the interference can no
longer be detected by measurements of
the original group alone and the group
is no longer performing any useful
Quantum computation this is called D
coherence I must add that this problem
is often presented the wrong way round
we are told that Quantum interference is
a very delicate process and must be
shielded from all outside influences
this is wrong
outside influences could cause minor
imperfections but it is the effect of
the quantum computation on the outside
world that causes decoherence
thus the race is on to engineer sub
microscopic systems in which information
carrying variables interact among
themselves but affect their environment
as little as possible another novel
simplification unique to the quantum
theory of computation partly offsets the
difficulties caused by D coherence it
turns out that unlike classical
computation where one needs to engineer
specific classical logic elements such
as and or and not the precise form of
the interactions hardly matters in the
quantum sense virtually any atomic scale
system of interacting bits so long as it
does not decohere could be made to
perform useful Quantum computations
interference phenomena involving vast
numbers of particles such as
superconductivity and super fluidity are
known but it seems that none of them can
be used to perform any interesting
computations at the time of writing only
single bits Quantum computations can be
easily performed in the laboratory
experimentalists however that two and
higher bit Quantum Gates the quantum
equivalent of the classical logical
elements will be constructed within the
next few years
these are the basic components of
quantum computers end quote uh yeah so
even now this is still true so let's
change next few years to next few
decades and but you cannot predict the
growth of knowledge David knows is
better than anyone else and whether or
not these people are confident or not
some are very confident some are so
confident they think they've already
done it you read some of the marketing
material from these people so I'll talk
about that in a moment let's just uh
we'll complete this part of the text
and then we'll uh we'll discuss some of
the hazards about trying to figure out
what's going on
with the state of quantum computation at
the moment
David goes on to say these are the basic
components of quantum computers some
physicists notably Rolf landauer of IBM
research are pessimistic about the
prospects for further advances after
that they believe that decoherence will
never be reduced to the point where more
than a few consecutive Quantum
computational steps can be performed end
quote which is worth saying look
again
if it's physically possible then all it
requires is knowledge someone saying
that they don't believe or they don't
think or they're not confident that
something such and such can't happen but
they don't have a physical law they can
point to
who cares
um I think we just have to wait and see
it's taking longer than what some people
might have expected but again our
expectations are themselves a form of
intuitive feeling so again irrelevant to
physics and epistemology largely
I've interrupted myself again so let's
keep going David says quote most
researchers in the field are much more
optimistic but perhaps that is because
only optimistic researchers choose to
work on Quantum computation
some special purpose quantum computers
have already been built and my own
opinion is that more complex ones will
appear in a matter of years rather than
decades
as for the universal quantum computer I
expect that its construction too is only
a matter of time though I should not
like to predict whether that time will
be decades or centuries
the fact that the repertoire of the
universal quantum computer contains
environments whose rendering is
classically intractable implies that new
classes of purely mathematical
computations must have become tractable
too for the laws of physics r as Galileo
said expressed in mathematical language
and rendering an environment has
tantamount to evaluating certain
mathematical functions and indeed many
mathematical tasks have now been
discovered which could be efficiently
performed by Quantum computation we're
all known classical methods are
intractable the most spectacular of
these is the task of factorizing large
numbers end quote because that will lead
us into next episode where we'll talk
about how to factorize these large
numbers using Shaw's algorithm but
that's the next episode I just want to
finish with a few remarks about the
state of
the experimental work on this because
something I've taken some interesting
because I think I've mentioned this
before many many times on topcast I just
happen to live near a particular
University my alma mater the place I
used to go to study I didn't study
Quantum computation it wasn't a thing at
that University at that time I knew
about Quantum computation only because I
read the fabric of reality but otherwise
it sort of didn't exist as a field at
the University I was at but now not only
does it exist as a field you can do
whole degree programs in it and it's a
very active area of research anyway
David's given us a hint there of what
some experimentalists are doing as I
said it's a very interesting area of
research but it's one of those places in
science where commercial in confidence
knowledge intellectual property
copyright stuff and so forth
which the investment into this stuff can
only be paid for or rather the research
can only be paid for by Hefty investment
to pay the people to do the expensive
experiments and those investors
typically want a return on their
investment and so at times we've got
perverse incentives operating namely
some companies don't want to share the
advances they're making because they
want to invent the thing first and then
be able to have a copyright on it so
that they can Market it and sell it and
have an advantage over the competitors
and that seems to kind of slow things
down in this area or does it because it
might also speed things up if you've got
actual competition going on in
developing these things via various
competing approaches to various
competing architectures different
research communities different
universities different nations are
trialling different Quantum systems as
quantum computers
at the moment they're all having it
seems to me about the same level of
progress but who knows the tension
between competitive
Commerce in the free market and the open
sharing and the information that happens
in science uh I don't know where to lay
my bets on that where what would be
faster
um
if somehow it's kind of like you want
you want the mixed economy here but I
don't advise that either I don't know
what the answer is should everyone just
share all of the information in which
case there's not an incentive for people
for wealthy people to invest in this
area or should everyone keep all of
their information
uh very commercially in confident so you
get the big investors by hinting at them
that you've got the idea you've got the
special road to progress road to the
universal quantum computer I don't know
as I say my old alma mater and
University of New South Wales which has
this Center Center for Quantum
computation
it's a place where our own federal
government invests heavily but also you
have Private Industry investing a whole
Consortium of universities uh uh are
working together there on this thing
funding this thing so these these people
have hundreds of millions maybe billions
of dollars even the US military is
involved out there at the University of
New South Wales with funding this stuff
and helping them with what they're doing
because it's a defense issue as well you
know because after all if you have the
first Universal quantum computer then
you break RSA technology that's an issue
for financial markets that's a national
security issue and so on and so forth
yeah the University of New South Wales
interesting it seems to me as an
outsider again I don't know anything
except that I went there and I checked
the website now and again but beyond
that I don't have any deep insight into
it they do seem to publicize their
results everywhere in journals and on
their website and the interesting thing
here is that although their progress and
progress Elsewhere on Quantum
computation appears to be quite slow
uh other areas of their research moves
on a pace so you know what I'm saying is
their work in Quantum Computing also
Bears on related important problems in
physics high temperature superconductors
improved the laser engineering
manipulating individual atoms for the
nanotechnology purposes and all that
sort of stuff so the growth of knowledge
is unpredictable so even if there is a
sense in which you might be failing at
your goal so to speak your goal of
building a universal quantum computer
the goal might not actually be the point
but rather the quest is the point it's
not the destination but it's the journey
and all that along the way you discover
new avenues new technologies and new
techniques and so on that could
potentially change the world even if the
way in which you wanted to change the
world with the universal quantum
computer remains a little elusive for
now and for the next few decades or
centuries even but you know it's
exciting to track these things and
epistemologically it's interesting for
me as well because you do get those
private companies from time to time who
announced they've got a fully
functioning quantum computer of some
kind or other
but you really get the details in other
words it's all very much kind of
thranos in Quantum Computing if you know
what I'm talking about here that that
company that claimed they could do blood
tests with just a fingerprint prick of
blood and uh I got you know billions of
dollars worth of investment and made
some temporary billionaires you know
then you get this sense sometimes in the
field of quantum computation with some
of these companies out there saying
we've got it we've
uh it's one in modern parlance is called
a grift it's not all a grifter we know
these things are physically possible I
guess we know that a pin prick of blood
is in principle physically possible in
terms of able to reveal just about every
disease that you've got okay but we're
not there yet
what David Deutsch did was to prove
these things quantum computers Universal
quantum computers are physically
possible
we're waiting now on the engineers and
experimentalists to catch up to his
vision
and he's the first to admit that you
know he's absolutely Amazed by the work
they do
experiments are hard engineering is hard
but what we can thank David Deutsch for
is knowing
that these other scientists and
Engineers are on to something
even if it's demonstrating many of the
ways these devices won't work
iterate and repeat guess and check
that's how all progress is made until
next time bye-bye
[Music]
launch